Uh,
welcome to all.
Thank you very much, uh, for, for coming before us.
Uh, so, uh, you've obviously, uh,
provided us with some good information here with that
of the dashboard, which we've all been able
to have a good look through in that
and see, uh, the, the, the size of the task that you have
with regards to meeting, uh, the, uh, requirements
of City treaty settlements is, is like,
so we've had the opportunity to meet with some other, uh,
ministries and other agencies, uh, prior to yourselves,
and it's all very helpful.
Um, at the end of the day, we as a committee,
and I'm sure you are very motivated to see that we
as the Crown are meeting our obligations
under the treaty settlements.
And it's fair to say that I think we've been on a, a journey
where perhaps not being as good as
what we should have been itself.
So this is, uh, about having a conversation.
Please, please relax. We, we want to try and find the gems.
We also want to find what the challenges are so that we can,
uh, have, have an ability to work on that to,
to get the best outcome we can.
So, uh, no ma um, we, we'll allow you perhaps a bit
of time at the beginning of that hearing again, uh, just
to hear from you, give us a bit of context,
and then we'll just get a bit of into a bit of cure.
So no may Okay.
Uh,
Um, thank you for the opportunity for both the Ministry
for Housing and Urban Development,
and to collectively appear
before you as the Mafi Select Committee
and share how we are collectively working across the Housing
and Urban Development System
to meet our treaty settlement obligations.
Uh, firstly I'd like to acknowledge the findings
of the auditor general report
and the message it sends that the Crown needs
to do better in upholding the commitments made to II
and HAPU through treaty settlements, uh,
with direct responsibilities for the housing
and urban development outcomes.
We recognize that our work sits at the heart of many
of these commitments, and
that our performance has a direct impact on the trust
and wellbeing of Maori communities.
Uh, treaty settlement commitments, um, are often referred to
as commitments that are monitored through teta.
Something I'm sure you are familiar with.
Uh, it's important for the committee to note that when we,
um, collectively talk about treaty settlement commitments,
for us, it's more broad, it's more broader than that.
And so, yes, we include TETA commitments,
but we also look at the pre
and post settlement engagements, including those
with ministerial accords relationship agreements, uh,
and any other post settlement mechanisms that are in place.
Um, as well as Maori community housing providers
and any other iwi Maori organizations.
We are collectively working
to ensure our treaty settlement commitments are not only
tracked and but understood by, understood
and honored in practice.
Uh, this includes embedding ANA as a framework
for accountability and transparency,
building internal capability to understand
and honor the intent behind each commitment, improving
how we partner with Iwi and Hapu in the design
and delivery of housing Urban Development Solutions,
and working more closely with Kawa Uni, uh,
to ensure we can bring synergies
and efficiencies on how we manage
our treaty settlement commitments.
Noting the dual role of uni corri
as we work together across the housing
and development system, the role of, uh,
monitoring the public service.
Uh, to that end, we have
provided the committee with two, uh, a threes,
or it looks like you've got a fours, uh, uh, page one.
I just wanted to show that. Talk to the committee.
Page one sets out our strategic context,
what the Auditor general's report means
for us, some key facts.
And those are quite important key facts that we have
to touch on, uh, what we're actually doing, some enablers
as well as some challenges.
Page two represents an exciting innovation
for our collective organizations,
and you'll see there's some series, a series of screenshots.
Um, they represent dashboards of dynamic data
that we've created to ensure that we're able to
grow knowledge and capability within our organization
and be more effective and efficient when working
with I Marty in the communities.
Uh, we acknowledge
that honoring treaty settlement commitments is not a one-off
task or just about meeting legal obligations.
It's a journey of transformation
and ongoing relational promises to ensure that outcomes
of settlement are enduring, meaningful and lived.
And so we're committed to walking that journey
with integrity, humility, and purpose. Kilda
Kilda. Very good.
And, uh, yeah, like I say, I mean, it's,
it was good for me to see, observe that, uh,
you've got specific, uh, dashboards associated with meaning
that, uh, you, you're taking this
seriously is probably the point.
And I say that because, uh, perhaps not all departments
of the crown of that situation.
Yeah. And it's, it's, uh, that's, uh, part of it.
So you've obviously got a division that's associated
with this particular aspect.
Just talk to me about actually how you're set up
as an organization specifically about the tasks.
Sure. I'll go first
and then I'll hand it over to, so the Ministry of Housing
and Urban Development, I'm the Deputy Chief Executive
for Maori Crown Relations.
And so I have a role of working across the system,
across the business to ensure that our organizations working
to support, uh, not only treaty settlement commitments, um,
as I mentioned earlier, but
to strengthen Maori crown relations.
And that looks like a variety of things.
We have, uh, policy, we've got delivery
strategy, insights and governance.
And we also have a dedicated space, which I, um, look
after, which is the Maori crown relationship space.
And Glen looks after our organizational performance team,
as well as the crown monitoring, uh, unit that we have too.
Excellent. So we have a team of
that are focused on supporting, um, the engagement
and the delivery of the tree
settlement commitments that we have.
And so the dashboards that I, that you have
before use, particularly the second page,
we've made a concerted effort to ensure
that when we are looking at treaty settlement commitments,
so if you go to the top left hand corner of page two,
you'll see that we've gone through every treaty settlement
and identified does it have an accord,
a relationship agreement, like
what is the post settlement mechanism, as well as the detail
that sits within it.
We've also looked at every iwi
and identified where they're at in terms
of their settlement journey, whether they're pre
or post, if they're post, are they one, five
or 10 years in their journey,
because we recognize that at one year,
your journey is different to
where you're at at five and 10 years.
Uh, so you are working to be quite intentional.
We've also gone through the last four years
of every Iwi annual report
and identify what's important to them based on
what they've put in their annual reports.
And we've been able to use the likes of co-pilot, um,
to help us synthesize that information.
And so that all that information helps us when we're going
out engaging to really understand, uh, what's important
to Iwi Maori depending on what rocky we in.
And so we've put all of
that information into a dynamic dashboard so
that internally, uh, wherever you are from, you can,
if you go to the Iwi report piece on the right hand side,
type in the iwi, and it'll bring up information
that's come up from an annual report, um, as well
as on the left hand side, enabling us
to understand those trees, settlement commitment pieces.
And so that information is, is collectively shared
and available across both of our organizations.
So as you've correctly sort of, uh, conveyed
the settlements are the beginning correct of a relationship,
could you tell us how, um,
your organization maintains the relationship?
What are you actually tangibly doing with regards
to maintaining the relationship?
So there are over 127, if we just use,
um, Iwis as an example.
And remember I mentioned
that when we are talking about Trudy settlement commitments,
we are talking about it broadly.
Uh, if we just look at the 127 thereabout, um, 83%,
uh, sorry, there are 87 that are in post settlement
and 37 that are in pre those that iwi
that are in the pre-settlement, we are actively working
with those that are getting close to settlement to determine
what their, uh, housing aspirations are.
So there are, uh, a number of iia being one of them,
wnu Land Settlement Trust, uh, where we've got, uh, a letter
of, sorry, a relationship agreement already in place
before they settle to ensure that settlement.
We can, um, Heidi Toi with the mahi with them.
And for those that are in the post settlement space,
if they have a ministerial accord within that accord,
it identifies what our connection needs to be.
They have a ministerial meeting.
We also have, um, a number of connections engagements
with them throughout the year, uh, as well as
our relationship agreements.
It's one who a year
and any other interactions that we might have.
So we are working proactively
where there are mechanisms in place.
If there aren't, uh, then we are, um,
working out through the information that we have
when might housing be a priority for them.
'cause we know that housing's a priority for our people. Mm.
It just happens at, at different points.
And so we have to manage our resources.
We've got, you know, resource constraints.
So we'd love to be able to work across all 127 thereabouts,
recognizing there's some river settlements in there too.
Uh, but the reality is we don't have the, uh, bums on seats
to be able to work intentionally with everyone.
So we have to figure out what's our segmentation approach.
Right. Open up for any questions.
Yes. Great.
Um, the, the breadth of your, of your,
uh, attention to the, to the quality
of the relationship in this space.
This is obviously not something
that you've just come up with in the last year.
Has this, this is, this is baked into your operation clearly
and has been around for what, several years?
So has it been around for six years?
Um, and we have been working, um,
quite intentionally throughout that period of time on
iwi Maori relationships and working in a way
to enable various communities in the last year.
And about, we recognize that across both KA order
and ua, Papa Kaa, we can work more efficiently.
We often working with the same groups.
And so instead of having the five cars of the driveway,
we thought, what information do we collectively have?
Um, ka order has a relationship agreement with the same area
as we do, like Okay.
We, we've got some swim lanes where we work, um,
individually on, in terms of the areas of responsibility
for both of our organizations,
but there's some collective work there too.
Mm-hmm. So we've evolved, um, as well as an organization
to be a bit more efficient given the resource constraints
that, that, that we have.
Mm-hmm. We don't have the luxury of having, um, a a lot
of resources, but we are focused on making sure
that we've got good efficient information communication
channels across so that we're able
to work more intentionally in our communities. Mm-hmm.
Just gonna, um, the, the reason my question is just
that we've, uh, is as, um, as David said in his opening, um,
remarks, the, the reason for this, um,
conversation is obviously the Auditor general's report.
Mm-hmm. And, um, so we've, uh, had the opportunity now to,
um, to have this kind of conversation
with a number of government departments.
And this is, this is unusual, um, the, the, the degree
to which you were already working in this space.
Pardon of me. We would love to go back
and ask what general was, did you guys sort of sit
as some exception to, um, to the, to the honoring 3D Yeah.
Uh, to, to those settlements.
I mean, clearly you guys are, are right across it already.
Mm-hmm. And continuing to, to improve to that extent.
Can you speak, you just mentioned, um, Ana mm-hmm.
Can you just, um, unpack that a little
Bit? Yeah. So
recognizing the framework that exists Yeah.
Um, for, that's put together by, um,
that's part of a piece of work that no doubt I'm sure
has talked to you guys about how
Does that apply to what you in, in terms of your work?
Yeah. So from a transparency perspective,
we wanna make sure that if there are any things,
if there are any, um, issues that we need to work through
or challenges that there's a framework
by which we can work to.
Okay. Yeah. We are not expecting any,
because as you see, we've done a whole lot of work
to make sure that we know Iwi Maori,
we know our communities, we know what's important
to them based on the analysis
we've done in the annual reports.
We recognize that, um, we think we're ahead of the game
and we wanna set the tone for the public service around
how we think, um, the public service needs to work
to support and honor, as well
as the treaty settlement commitments that come out of that.
Which is why we take a broader view, not just Mm.
Uh, we wanna make sure that that's why we've got,
when we look at, um, the key facts, you know,
those things are really important to us.
We, we can talk to how many accords we've got,
relationship agreements, how many II settlements there are.
Like we know that level of detail
and we know that across the analysis that we've done.
Um, housing is important to I people,
we inherently know that anyway.
Uh, but, you know, it's good to have good data and insights
and intelligence to be able to
validate the way in which we're working as an organization.
Climate Water has a regional presence, so that data insights
and intelligence from their staff
and from their, is really helpful to inform, um,
the way in which we work.
Um, and we've obviously got that, um, system leaders
and organization to ensure
that we are utilizing the information
that we collectively have
to ensure we are di designing things, uh, with insights
and intelligence in mind to ensure
that the system, um, shifts.
Um, thank you. Um,
and appreciate the dashboard.
'cause it's really good at a bird's eye view to be able
to click on anywhere, see
what it all here looks like, how's it going?
Um, and so, you know, I, I don't know
of many, if any, that do this.
That's great. Um, Koto, um, I wanted
to invite a conversation around how, so we've got this stuff
around, um, treaty settlement commitments.
Thank you. Um, and progress and,
and investment in, um, do you also have like,
district-wide data that you might have like, um, for typical
Tika or, um, tied R fatigue.
And so you can see across, and,
and this is just one set of data, um,
and further do you track
and look across yourselves as a housing ecosystem in terms
of, um, current funding commitment into,
at a bird's eye view, but then also stuff
that's been stopped in a mindful K order.
We are losing, well, we've had 450 homes, um, you know,
potentially, well that's the word on the street,
that there won't be 450 homes.
So I Tokyo built, um, through the Coing water funding cuts.
So, um, it would be interesting to know
how across the housing ecosystem
that you might look at it all here
and say, okay, we've got this much of a pot coing water,
we've got this much going on in terms of, um,
even progressive home ownership.
'cause they're all different models, eh, um,
do you sit there as a team and,
and look at how the investment's going, what's outstanding,
who hasn't progressed things, um, you know,
and who needs a bit more attention?
And then where funding has been ended, or a change
or shift in, um, you know, government priority, like
what we are having with crying order, um,
how do we track progress to a land that's somewhere mm-hmm.
You know, um, ultimately
for housing our people and community.
Right. Uh, so if I draw your attention
to the dashboard mm-hmm.
Piece again, and let me know if I don't cover off,
um, all of your questions.
Um, so in terms of how we look at and the data
and information that sits inside that, uh,
we've obviously got the, so the top two are internal,
and the bottom left is internal.
The bottom right is external.
And so what we've been able
to do is utilize the internal iwi report to again,
understand what's happening in the bottom right.
One is an IS work we are putting, pulling that together
to provide to iwi.
It's an external facing, um, dashboard that you can segment
by TLA recognizing
that not every iwi their people live in their,
so they might want to identify, um, if we are looking at KU
for example, they might wanna include Auckland
and their TLA, whatever that looks like.
And what that does is pull together a whole range of data
that exists publicly across the housing
and urban development system.
Yes. Yep. And package it in a way that,
um, makes sense to them.
And so we recognize that, um, there's lots of data
and the engagements that we've been having as well
as the analysis that we've undertaken has identified
that we want some data, they want information,
and all the information that we've
provided is publicly available.
We've just packaged it in a way so that I don't have
to look at five different systems.
Yes. They can look at one. Yeah.
So we, we wanna be helpful in the external mahi that we do.
Um, as it relates to, um, what other agencies,
and when I say other agencies, it's kind order, it's,
and us, um, what we often do is by RAW here, look at,
um, we have some sort of internal heat maps that look at,
um, investment internal here across, um,
all our three organizations.
Um, what types of development we've been doing,
how much engagement would we doing on what, um, coupled
with, uh, the insights
and intelligence piece
around what's important to our people.
And if I use, um, KU as an example, um,
they have a, uh, social accord led
by MSD and we're a part of that.
Yeah. One of the priorities that sits within that is Kota,
and that's their, um, uh, the housing
platform at which KU have put forward as their, uh,
as part of their accord.
Now in Kota, they've identified that the biggest, um, need
for them is housing repairs.
Mm-hmm. Um, and then new builds a little bit later on.
So they've already done the analysis
and they've already identified what the priorities are, um,
as a public service.
Uh, what we've been working with them on,
this is the manual things that we can bring to the table.
These are the things that you'll
need to be able to bring to the table.
So recognizing and being really clear about,
we can't do everything, but this is what we can do.
Um, and this is what you might be able to think about doing,
and this is what this agency does.
So trying to work really meaningful across
the public service to make sure that through
that accord mechanism, uh,
we are bringing all the right parties to the table
to help enable their aspirations.
Because as you'll know, ku, it's not about building houses.
It's about, um, you know, having whanau
and warm dry safe homes, but it's more border than that.
Yeah. Can I just ask this up on that? Yeah.
And then also, so I'm just mindful that different agencies,
different ministries are at different maturities on this
journey and for you to achieve, I think that's an admirable
situation of trying to be a bit more holistic across the
crown rather than just pigeonhole in your silo.
I think, I think that's, that's music to my ears.
I'm sure this others itself,
but how do you actually achieve that when you've got some
entities that are not at the le at the level,
at the maturity of what you are, I mean, must be difficult.
Um, we are really fortunate one to work really closely
with Kaiwa order as well as uni.
Right. And so that's the housing
and Urban development system,
not just includes our three organizations.
We've got MSD and others.
So we work really closely
when we are leading into an accord, um, engagement
to make sure that we've got everything lined up.
We have regular catchups, um,
where UNI is leading the Accord,
though they have regular weekly meetings. So as, as
Just explain that. So you have
regular catchups with other
agencies Yeah. As a group Yeah.
To try so across, if I use the housing
and even development system as an example, relating to hug,
ka order and uni, right.
Um, by way of example, uh, we recognize that there are, um,
the policy priorities for Maori in respect of housing
and even development as three organizations.
We need to identify what are the maybe five big rocks
that are gonna make the biggest shift, um,
for Maori housing outcomes.
And so as an organization, we've come together
and identified what are we gonna focus on
that is gonna have the bigger shift for Maori.
So even from a policy priority perspective, recognizing
that is gonna have an impact in communities.
Mm. 'cause what we are hearing from Iwi Maori is we wanna,
how do we support, um, system shift?
How do we engage more in policy settings?
And so, which we welcome,
but we've gotta get our house in order
and identify, well, what are the big policy priorities
that relate to, um, Maori
and how does that reflect
what the community wants and needs?
Sorry, I'm sorry if it,
so sounding like I'm getting a bit granular
and bit down in the gearbox, who's, who's leading that?
Like, who, who initiates that
Hub weather system lead?
You are doing that, so it's not TPK
Across the housing and urban development system,
Or just over the housing. Okay. Yes,
Yes. Okay. Thank you.
So, um, uni TI obviously has, uh,
a policy principle policy advisors
to government on Maori development.
We lead the housing and urban development system,
of which uni ti has a delivery function Yeah.
And that monitoring function.
So we recognize as a dual role there. Yes.
But when we are thinking about those policy priorities,
we have collective roles as does
to setting what that looks like. I
Way I'm trying to reflect here is that I,
I continually observe, uh, Crown's relationship
as actually a multiple number
of agencies trying to have a relationship.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And it just doesn't make sense
to me 'cause the crown is the crown.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And I'm trying to, to to,
to find the gems on actually how we make that more
of a holistic crown approach with regards
To relationship. It's, the thing with
the chair is that it's like, um,
you know, the hanau with the 10 cars at the doorstep,
you know, knocking on the door, so many
Crown agencies coming at anyway.
And they're not resourced to manage multiple relationships,
let alone the crown function.
Sorry, sorry. We're going off. You know? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Like, there's just so many, um, relationships to manage, uh,
post-settlement, let alone pre-settlement as well.
It's really, could,
Could I just add there, uh, just to chair, uh,
and I guess the challenges and how we execute that.
So sort of circling back to your point, what are some
of those gyms that make it work?
It's absolutely about good people doing good things. Yeah.
And staying focused on task to serve those most in need.
And then grouping up around their,
it's, it's not rocket science.
The challenge, of course is, um, I guess regardless
of the political environmental context of the time, he,
so we are really, um, lucky to have Jesus' leadership Yeah.
And pulling this together, giving us a really strong sense
of direction and being able to crystallize, I guess,
and raise up some of those key things
that are gonna turn the biggest leave biggest.
Yeah.
So, um, thank you. Thank you.
Um, wondering, so I've got two questions with this, um,
dashboard and there's the publicly,
'cause that's the issue is that you go hunting
info back in the, your hunting info, trying
to get an understanding of what the housing
ecosystem looks like.
So can, um, au go
and click on somewhere to access this
and, um, use it like a, um,
but also can, is this information being shared over into the
iwi at the as well?
'cause it, it'll be so helpful. 'cause when I click on the
TER, I can see maps, I can see census data.
And this stuff could be quite cool too, in terms
of getting an understanding tribally as to, um,
if this stuff could be shared over to the Yeah.
So the information comes from the oh.
As well as a range of other areas. Cool.
So we've, so we, we are pulling from publicly available
information and TER is one of them.
Yeah. Uh, and we, this will be available publicly. Mm-hmm.
Um, and as one of our, I guess, offerings back to Iwi Maori,
given that, uh, we recognize that PYA is important,
but there are other things that we have, um, available
to support, uh, decision making, uh,
to iwi Maori and data is one of them.
So PYA data, uh, as well as insights
and intelligence to shift system policy priorities.
So almost trying to work out what's the buffet of things
that, uh, as the crown we are able to offer up, um,
in a meaningful, intentional way to, to shift the system.
And so, um, this will have you, you've got,
you've only got like, okay, little squidgy of, of the, of
what the dashboard looks like,
but you'll see that you can sort by iwi groups, TLAs.
And we've also got HU regions, which are more sort of like
style regions where, where they're all bigger.
We, uh, expect
that the iwi groups in the TLA piece is probably gonna be
the more important, but it's pulling from all of
that information, stats and the likes.
And so, uh, just to follow on, so this is, uh,
all about treaty settlements and those who are settled.
Um, but knowing that there are many that aren't mm-hmm.
I like you to, um,
and so you'd also be able to have this regional information,
you know, um, available.
It's not just, this isn't just for the settled people
that this for Iwi Maori.
Correct. And we are working
with those that aren't settled.
So the 37 that aren't settled
and recognizing there are significant, uh, in, uh,
we are still having, uh, engagements in relationships
and conversations with those who aren't settled.
We can't get to everyone.
So it's often those that reach out, um,
that we get to at the moment.
Uh, but the intention is, uh, that we work out what a
key account management type model might look like
and how we might segment the 124 ish plus the
Maori community housing providers
and all the other providers that, um, support, um, housing
through whether it could be the, like, so, uh,
for us it was really important to understand
what is the current state
and let's understand what exists, which is why we pull all
of this information together so that when we are ready to,
uh, go out, we've got good information to go with.
Mm-hmm. And technology has been a really, um, helpful,
uh, to enable us to pull these dashboards together
and synthesize the information, recognizing
that the report analysis piece is based on, um,
it's not perfect, but we've gone through the annual reports.
Well, technology has gone through the annual reports, um,
and then we've done some stress testing
to make sure it's picked the, you know,
that it's by and large.
Right. Um,
and that exercise itself would've taken a year,
but through the advancement of technology
and then putting it on a dashboard, uh, time was
significantly shortened.
And now people within our organizations can go in
and look at what, you know, what's important to this iwi,
you know, so we are building capability by having data
and insights and intelligence internally, um,
for our to access,
Uh, di direct question such around, um,
our current housing crisis since I took it,
we've got an issue, eh, you know,
like trying to house our people.
Mm-hmm. And this is particularly, I think it's for all
of you because, um, you're all trying
to head in the same direction,
but, you know, um, dollar figure changes, direction
of travel and policy priorities.
If we have 450 houses that are being canceled out of the
pipeline and there's a variety of homes
that are knocked down, partial builds to mouth
to mouth being canceled in tto, for instance,
do you guys sit down as a team and go, we are nearly there.
We were halfway there. Oh my gosh. What are we gonna do?
Mm-hmm. Um, I'm mindful
'cause I'm getting a bit of pressure around,
and it's in the newspaper right now in the north, um,
with those half filled, the nearly done, those
that are empty lots, do you sit down as a team
and go, okay, we've had a change.
There's no longer a dollar there, what can we do? Yeah.
Um, because I'm mindful of the traction
and the momentum that was happening in,
and then it's kind of like, just feels real, um, Omo.
Mm. So yeah. Do, I mean,
I'm not asking for a specific thing.
Mm-hmm. I'll probably just email
you guys and ask for more help.
Mm-hmm. Because, um, there's,
there's comms going out in the
Northern Advocate, you know what I mean?
And there's houses that are half done.
So how, how do you guys sit down
and go is, you know, Maori looking
for solutions, um, for our people,
If I use Kota as an example in Tehri, uh, we sit down
with, with Iwi to understand needs
and communities so that, uh, we're working in a way
that meets the needs of the community.
But as I mentioned earlier, there are things
that we can bring to the table
and there are things that others
will need to bring to the table.
So we're in the process of,
and we regularly meet with Kota, uh,
and they also have two opportunities,
ministerial engagements, the one's not long gone,
and then the next one will be Ang.
Um, so even as Iwi Maori in the Crown,
we often meet collectively to work out, okay,
what are our priorities here?
Um, and as mentioned, it's not always pya, it's,
there are other things and how do we, uh, work differently,
uh, in different areas, recognizing the challenges
kudo have, uh, infrastructure access
and things like that are quite different
to perhaps the challenges that we might have in Nui,
you know, so making sure that we are working in a way
that meets the needs of the community
and recognizing the, uh, unique preferences that each,
um, has.
Yeah. There's a few infrastructure issues, uh,
in the farm trying to get a house built. So we're here.
Right. Um, we'll just try to get back onto this,
but, um, I just wanna ask a question.
Like, I think, um, you've demonstrated that you,
there's some great work being done here,
and it's not just recently you, you've been on this journey
for quite some time, uh, whereas we've got other areas
of the crown that are in a bit of a catch up mode.
So well done for that some,
but I, I want to get to the nitty gritty.
We are the, we are the punch points, we are the challenges
for you at this particular point in time. Yeah, sure.
So on the page one handout, you'll see
that we've identified a couple of key challenges that exist.
And they won't be, uh, things that are probably new to you.
They may have been things that
have already been shared to you.
So increased resourcing requests from iwi when constrained
the funding environment, recognizing that, um, iwi, Maori
pier is one of those things.
And we are in a fiscally constrained environment.
So having intentional conversations around what we can do
and what we can't do, uh, funding
and requests are becoming more complex,
requiring joint agency contributions.
And if I use, uh, some of our ministerial accord, um,
activity where if, um, the desires to do X,
that actually cuts into four or five different agencies.
And so, uh, the funding mechanism
that sits within our government agencies doesn't necessarily
allow us to easily, uh,
fund in a seamless way without additional compliance being,
uh, put upon iwi around, you know,
funding reports and things like that. So that's, so
This's an important point.
What, what do you see as the solution for that problem?
So there are some great examples that exist at the moment,
uh, that are actually being led out by MSD and,
and some of the social accords that they've got
where we are looking at doing collective reporting.
Yeah. Uh, so, uh, they are doing a lot of leading the way
around, how do we make this a bit easier?
Yeah. So there are, um, models that exist and the,
and they're, um, yeah.
And there's an, they've got an example
of, of what that might look like.
Okay. 'cause if you've got five different agencies,
10 different agencies, yeah.
Um, what we haven't really thought through is
what if there is funding going through there?
There's also, um, club funding where, uh,
pier goes into from different agencies into an agency,
and then it goes to the entity as well
for whatever the COPA is.
So there's two, um, pilots,
I guess piloted approaches Yeah.
That are currently in existence
that, you know, have their merit. That's good. Right. Yeah.
Good. I, uh, now with the, uh, the delivery of, uh,
what you've, uh, presented us here, I'm trying
to identify in inside the report from the audit general, uh,
there was a comment there that not every agency
has the incentive Right.
From the top through the organization
to deliver these kind of outcomes.
So with regards to your organization mm-hmm.
I assume, and it's a question I assume right.
From your ce this is a priority Correct. That you're doing.
Can you describe that? So it is lead from the very
Top of the Correct. And our, our
CE has a performance expectation
As well. That's what I'm trying to get
to. Mm-hmm. Okay.
And, uh, I thinks as
Do I Right.
And my team. Yeah.
But, um, we don't see that as being the, the lever
or the mechanism to have to do this.
We think this is the right thing to do. Yeah.
And that's an account accountability piece that sits there
as well throughout the organization from the top,
We, we have other organizations
that have got people like US equivalent roles, who believe
that it's the right thing to do as well,
but they're not enabled to actually do it.
Yeah. So there's a difference there.
You'll see from the work that we've done,
that enablement across both
of our organizations is certainly supported and as, yeah.
Okay. Do you, do you division
or if I call it that crew, um,
do you have a budget for this itself?
Like are you, or are you actually plucking vulnerable
schools, parts of the organization?
Uh, yes and yes.
So recognizing that if I, I'll use my, um, uh,
organization as an example, As I mentioned earlier.
So yes, budget within the team,
but also across the organization, depending on
what we are bringing to the table,
it might require support from other parts of the business.
Yes. And so we don't necessarily look at it as being
this is your carved out money.
This is the pier that the organization has
available, um, as a whole.
And if we are working in this particular community,
and this is what the need is,
or this is the, a core mechanism that exists
and this is how it might need to be enabled,
and pier is required, it comes from the organization instead
of, uh, this is what say I might have in, in, in my teams.
It's not from an organization perspective.
Yeah. And, and, um, else would be similar. Okay. Yes.
And yes, we do have a budget, uh,
although it's, um, relatively small at the moment.
Uh, and, um, we would draw across a wider pool of, uh,
of funds to support Maori initiatives,
including working alongside IDBK.
Very good. Dinner, Uh, KDA.
Um, thank you for your, uh, obviously, you know, very clear,
um, measurement and monitoring of this.
So I just have, um, I wanted to acknowledge the work you did
with AWA and the um, um, development, which was awesome.
Um, and I attend, which it was very well received, um,
and the work that both in TPK deliver in there,
which was a good example of, I think
what you're talking about, the cross agency work.
Um, but the one I really wanted to ask you about was, um,
the one in, uh, um, the
development 150 homes mm-hmm.
Um, partnership between the Crown
and, um, iwi, the Five Iwi.
And I, I guess, uh, the reason my question is about, uh,
that's a different model 'cause some
of those iwi have settled mm-hmm.
And some have not. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Um, and still there's able to be this partnership agreement
between you to deliver this spectacular development.
Mm-hmm. Um, so how do you, how do you measure
and quantify that in terms of, you know, you're monitoring
because it's a, you know,
I don't know whether you have others
like that around the country.
'cause I'm only interested in what happens in these guys
because that's where I'm from, but, um, um,
but you know, what do you have similar
and how do you put that into this model?
So we have five iwi prototypes
of which one exists in entire, which is what that is.
Yeah. And so we have a number across the country,
and that was a way in which, how do we work differently, uh,
to enable communities working with a collective of Iwi.
Uh, so that's a range of, well, that's one example of
how we've looked at things in a different way.
And that what that, um, kicked off
and we worked collectively with through
to enable the Iwi prototypes.
Um, speaking to AWA as an example,
another way at which we're looking to work collectively, we,
um, worked with local council housing providers in the
Eastern Bay of Plenty through AWA to look at what a
regional, um, housing plan might look like.
And so we brought everyone together.
We actually think we invited ourselves
to the table to say, hey.
Um, and so we are providing some financial support to get,
um, a current state of what the iwi within that, um,
have in terms of their housing priorities, um, so that
they can work out as a collective how to enable, um,
their region, uh, in terms of the housing aspirations.
And so that's a different type of financial support
that we might bring to the table for Iwi, uh, to enable them
to work more collectively, local, sever, central government,
government, iwi, Maori
and other providers where they come together, uh, yeah.
To, to work in a, I guess more considered way
around enabling housing aspirations.
So that's something that we've done recently, uh, to yeah.
Support that particular all here.
So we've got prototypes, we've got the Iwi collective piece,
we've got the direct engagement,
we've got the ministerial accord.
So there's lots of different mechanisms that we have.
And you don't have to be settled, um, to be part
of what that looks like.
I guess that's the point. Yeah. Yeah.
So we don't,
but we, what we do recognize is that those who are settled,
whether they're one five
or 10 year, their capability, um, is different than those
that are in that pre-settlement space.
There Go. Yeah. So that's,
Unless you've got Will begging on the table, that's
Why this a collective with some set, a non settled,
you've got that capability share
As well. Yeah.
Unfortunately, our time's come to an end
and, uh, we've got an agenda we have to get through today.
I've really enjoyed this. It's been very helpful for me.
Um, hopefully my fellow committee meeting to sit out. Same.
So thank you very much for coming
before us, uh, this morning.
I think, um, I want to pass on my congratulations for
where you are at as organizations
with what you're doing here.
I'm not saying things are absolutely perfect.
I knowing you that you're always striving
to be better than, than what you are.
I think one thing I'd like to convey is I think it's really
important that this year is as much about the relationship,
uh, with, with Iwi, with Maori
and a relationship is where you're at a point
where they feel free to be able to talk up to you
where they feel there's problems.
You know, that's, that's when you've
actually made a relationship.
It's when they're not communicating
with, you're not quite there.
And we hear from them when, when
that's there you go, there you go.
And of course, uh, uh, we are endeavoring to mature that
to the point where it's a 360 degree, uh, topics of,
of actually how this is itself.
So well done, uh, with everything, thank you,
uh, for coming for us.
We will be observing.
Well, we have a motivation here
to make sure the crown's doing the best it can.
And obviously that'll be exposed
through our scrutiny weeks at the end
of the year when we've got, but we, we're not wanting
to be this a talking, we want this to be a communication.
'cause we need you to help us.
We don't know, uh, uh, everything.
We, we, we have the, the, the lens for where we sit as mps.
But of course you guys, there are, do I say you're, you,
you're, you're having a lot more optics of
where the successes and the challenges are.
We need to know the challenges as much
as the successes is good to celebrate,
but it's more important for us to see what the work cons are
so that we can use us,
whatever the tool is on the select committee
to effect a better outcome for, for Al Maori, for Maori.
Uh, so thank you very much for coming forward and,
and I acknowledge, uh, all your support
because I know that this is a team effort, uh, with regards
to, so, uh, Kia.